Armenian News Network / Groong
Treaty of Kars
(Treaty of Friendship between Turkey, the Socialist Soviet Republic
of Armenia, the Azerbaijan Socialist Soviet Republic, and the Socialist
Soviet Republic of Georgia)
Done in Kars, October 23, 1921
Ratified in Yerevan, September 11, 1922
(Original in French and Russian)
The Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey, on the one
side,
and the Governments of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Armenia (SSRA),
the Azerbaijan Socialist Soviet Republic (ASSR), and the Socialist
Soviet Republic of Georgia (SSRG), on the other side,
Agreeing on the principle of the fraternity of the nations and on the
right of the peoples to dispose freely of their destiny; desirous to
establish cordial affinity and sincerely amicable relations between
them, based upon reciprocal interest;
Have decided to enter into negotiations, with the participation of the
Government of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic (RSFSR),
to conclude a Treaty of Friendship and for this purpose have appointed
as their plenipotentiaries:
The Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey:
Kiazim Kara Bekir Pasha, Deputy to the Grand National Assembly from
Adrianople and Commander of the Eastern Front; Veli Bey, Deputy to the
Grand National Assembly from Bordour; Mouhtar Bey, former Undersecretary
of State for Public Works; Memdouh Shevket Bey, Turkish Plenipoteniary
Representative in Azerbaijan;
The Government of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Armenia:
Askanaz Mravian, People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs; Poghos
Makintsian, People's Commissar for Internal Affairs;
The Government of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Azerbaijan:
Behboud Shahtahtinskiy, People's Commissar for State Control
The Government of the Socialist Soviet Republic of Georgia:
Shalva Eliava, People's Commissar for War and Navy; Alexander Svanidze,
People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and People's Commissar for
Finance;
The Government of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic:
Jacques Hanetzky, Plenipotentiary Representative in Lithuania,
Who, having communicated their powers that have been found to be in due
form, have agreed as follows.
Article I
The Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and the
Governments of the Socialist Soviet Republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan,
and Georgia consider as null and void the treaties concluded between the
Governments which have previously exercised sovereign rights over
territory actually forming part of the territory of the Contracting
Parties and concerning the above-mentioned territories, as well as the
treaties concluded with third states concerning the Transcaucaucasus
Republics. It is understood that the Turkish-Russian Treaty signed in
Moscow on March 16, 1921 (1337) will be exempted from the terms of this
Article.
Article II
The Contracting Parties agree not to recognize any treaty of peace or
other international act imposed upon one any of them against its will.
In virtue of this agreement, the Governments of the Socialist Soviet
Republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia agree not to recognize any
international act concerning Turkey which has not been recognized by the
National Government of Turkey, actually represented by its Grand
National Assembly. (By the term Turkey is meant, in the present Treaty,
the territories included in the Turkish National Pact of January 28,
1920 (1336), developed and proclaimed by the Ottoman Chamber of Deputies
in Constantinople and communicated to the press and to all States). For
its part, the Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey agrees
not to recognize any international act concerning Armenia, Azerbaijan,
and Georgia that may not be by the respective Governments of these
countries, actually represented by the Soviets of Armenia, Azerbaijan,
and Georgia.
Article III
The Governments of the Socialist Soviet Republics of Armenia, Azerbaijan
and Georgia, recognizing that the system of capitulations is
incompatible with the free life of the national development of all
countries, as well as with the full exercise of sovereign rights,
consider as null and abrogate the exercise, in Turkey, of all offices
and rights included in this system.
Article IV
The northeast border of Turkey (according to the map of the Russian
General Staff, on a scale of 1:210000.5 verstes to the inch) is
determined by the line which, beginnin at the village of Sarp on the
Black Sea, passes by the Mt. Khedis Mga, the watershed line of at Mt.
Shavshet- Mount Kana Dagh; from there, it always follows the former
northern administrative borders of the sanjaks of Ardahan and Kars, the
thalweg of the Arpachai River and that of the Arax as far as the mouth
of the Nijni Kara Su river.  (For details of the border and questions
pertaining to it, see Annexes I and II and the map inclosed, signed by
the two Contracting Parties.  In the event of discrepancies between the
text of the Treaty and the Map, the text of the treaty shall prevail
over the map).
A mixed commission of delimitation, comprised of equal number of
members, with the participation of a representative of the RSFSR, is
directed to determine in detail and to establish the actual border of
the state, and to erecte boundary markers. (Annex IV: the map). [not
reproduced]
Article V
The Turkish Government and the Soviet Governments of Armenia and
Azerbaijan are agreed that the region of Nakhichevan, within the limits
specified by Annex III to the present Treaty, constitutes an autonomous
territory under the protection of Azerbaijan.
Article VI
Turkey agrees to cede to Georgia suzerainty over the town and port of
Batum, with the territory to the north of the frontier, indicated in
Article IV of the present Treaty, which formed part of the district of
Batum, on condition:
That the population of the localities specified in the present
Article shall enjoy a greater measure of local administrative autonomy,
that each community is guaranteed its cultural and religious rights, and
that this population may introduce in the above-mentioned places an
agrarian system in conformity with its own wishes.
That Turkey be assured free transit through the port of Batum for
commodities and all materials destined for, or originating in, Turkey,
without customs duties and charges, and with the right for Turkey to
utilize the port of Batum without special charges. For the application
of this Article, a commission of representatives of the interested
Parties shall be created immediately after the signing of the present
Treaty.
Article VII
The Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and the
Government of SSRG agree to facilitate the crossing of the border by the
inhabitants of the bordering zones, on condition of the observance of
the customs, police, and sanitary regulations which shall be established
in this regard by a mixed commission.
Article VIII
The Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey and and the
Government of SSRG consider that it is necessary for the inhabitants of
the bordering districts of two countries to make use of summer and
winter pastures on the other side of the border, and agree to accord to
these inhabitants the right to cross the border with their animals and
to avail themselves of the customary pasturage. Customs formalities, and
police, sanitary, and other measures applying to border crossings shall
be determined by a mixed commission.
Article IX
With the view to assuring the opening and free passage through the
Straits for the commerce of all peoples, Turkey and Georgia agree to
submit the definitive elaboration of the international regulations for
the Black Sea and the Straits to a subsequent conference composed of
delegates from the littoral states, unless the decisions there reached
encroach upon the sovereignty and security of Turkey and of
Constantinople, its capital.
Article X
The Contracting Parties agree not to admit upon their territories the
formation or sojourn of organizations or groups pretending to assume the
role of government of the other country or a part of its territory, nor
the sojourn of groups having for their purpose war against the other
country. It is clearly understood that the Turkish territory mentioned
above in the present Article is the territory under the direct civil and
military administration of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey.
Article XI
Nationals of each of the two Contracting Parties, residing in the
territory of the other Party, shall be treated in accordance with the
duties and obligations decreed by the laws of the country in which they
reside, with the exception of those concerning the national defense,
from which they shall be exempt. Questions of family right, inheritance,
and legal capacity are also excepted in the present Article, and shall
be settled by a special agreement.
Article XII
The Contracting Parties will apply the most favored nation rule to
nationals of one of the Contracting Parties residing in the territory of
the other. This Article does not affect the rights accorded reciprocally
by the Soviet Republics to citizens of allied Soviet Republics on their
territory, as well as to the rights accorded by Turkey to nationals of
the Moslem states allied with Turkey.
Article XIII
All inhabitants of territory that was part of Russia before 1918, and
over which the sovereignty of Turkey is affirmed, shall have the
opportunity, if they desire to relinquish their Turkish nationality, to
leave Turkey freely, taking with them their possessions and goods, or
the proceeds of their sale. Likewise, all inhabitants of territory whose
sovereignty has been ceded to Georgia by Turkey shall have the
opportunity, if they desire to relinquish Georgian nationality, to leave
the territory of Georgia freely, taking with them their possessions,
goods, and capital.
The inhabitants mentioned in the above sentences shall be granted a
deferment of one month from military service, beginning on the date on
which they shall have signified in due form their intention of leaving
the territories in question.
Article XIV
The Contracting Parties agree to conclude, within the period of six
month from the signature of the present Treaty, special arrangements
with regard to the refugees of the wars of 1918 and 1920.
Article XV
Each of the Contracting Parties agrees to promulgate, immediately after
the signature of the present Treaty, a complete amnesty to citizens of
the other Party for crimes and offenses committed during the course of
the war on the Caucasian front.
Article XVI
The Contracting Parties agree to effect reciprocally, within the period
of two months after the signature of the present Treaty, the
repatriation of former military and civilian prisoners residing in the
territory of one of the Contracting Parties.
Article XVII
In order to ensure the continuance of relations between their countries,
the Contracting Parties agree to take, in a common agreement, all the
measures necessary to maintain and develop as quickly as possible
railway, telegraphic, and other communications, as well as to assure
free transit of persons and commodities without any hindrance. It is
understood, however, that the entry and departure of travelers and
commodities will be governed by the full application of all the
regulations established in this regard by each of the Contracting
Parties.
Article XVIII
With a view to organizing commercial relations and regulating economic,
financial, and other questions necessary to strengthen the friendly
relations between the two countries, a commission of representatives
from the interested countries shall convene at Tiflis immediately after
the signature of the present Treaty.
Article XIX
The Contracting Parties agree to conclude consular conventions within
the period of three months from the signature of the present Treaty.
Article XX
The present Treaty, concluded between the Governments of Turkey,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, shall be subject to ratification. The
exchange of ratifications shall take place at Yerevan within the
shortest possible time.
The present Treaty shall enter into force immediately after the exchange
of the acts of ratification, exception being made to Articles VI, XIV,
XVI, XVIII, and XIX, which enter into force immediately after the
signature of the Treaty.
ANNEX I
Northeast Frontier (follows verbatim Annex 1(a) of the Turkish-Russian
Treaty of March 16, 1921)
The northeast border of Turkey is fixed as follows (according to the map
of the Russian General Staff, on a scale of 1:210,000.5 verstes to the
inch):
The village of Sari on the Black Sea, Mt. Kara-Shalvar (5014), crosses
Chorokh to the north from the village of Maradidi, passes to the north
of Sabur, Mt. Khedis Mga (7052), Mt. Kva-Kibe, village of Kavtareli,
line of watershed Medzibna Mountain and Mt. Great-Kessun (6468), follows
the line of the watershed Mt. Korda (7910), goes along the western part
of the ridge Shavshet to the administrative border of the former Artvin
district, goes to the Mt. Sari Chai (Kara-Issal) (8478), summit of the
mountain Kviral, then follows the administrative border of the former
Ardahan district by Mt. Kana-Dagh, thence, turning to the north, goes to
Mt. Tlil (Grmani) (8357), and following the former border of Ardahan,
goes to the northeast of the village of Badela, to the river
Poskov-Chai, and follows to the south aling this river to a point to the
north of the village of Chap Chakh, then it leaves the river, follows
the watershed to Mt. Airlian-Bashi, goes over the Mts. Kella-Tana
(9709), reaches Mt. Kasris-Seri (9681), and follows along the river
Karzamet Chai until it reaches the river Kura, thence it goes along the
line of the watershed of Mt. Kara-Ogli (7259), whence, dividing in two
parts Lake Khazapin, it goes to the elevation 7580, then to Mt. Geg-Dagh
(9152), goes over Mt. Uch-Tapoylar (9783), and Mt. Taila-Kala (9716),
ridge 9065, where it leaves the border of the former Ardahan district
and passes over the Mts. B. Akh Barba (9963), 8828 (8827), 7602, goes to
the east of the village of Ibish, reaches elevation 7518, and then Mt.
Kizil Dash (7439) (7440), village of New Kizil-Dash (Kizel-Dash), passes
to the west from the Karamemeda, goes to the river Jambushu Chai (which
is to the east of the village of Delaver, B. Kikli, and Tikhnis), and
through the village of Vartanli and Bashi-Shuragel; following the
above-named river, it goes to the river Arpa Chai to the north of
Kayalala, from there follows all the time the thalweg of the river Arpa
Chai and arrives at the river Araxes, following its thalweg to the mouth
of the river Lower Kara Su.
ANNEX II
Withdrawal of Troops in Arpa-Chai and Araxes Regions (follows verbatim
Annex 1(b) of the Turkish-Russian Treaty of March 16, 1921)
Taking into consideration that the border line, as it is shown in Annex
I, is the thalwegs of the rivers Arpa Chai and Araxes, the Government of
the Grand National Assembly undertakes to remove the line of
block-houses to the distance of 8 versts from the Alexandropol-Yerevan
railway line in the district of the Arpa Chai river, and to the distance
of 4 versts from the above-named railway in the district of the river
Araxes. The lines which enclose the above-named districts are shown
below: the district of the river Arpa Chai at sections (a) and (b) of
Paragraph 1, and the district of the river Araxes in Paragraph 2.
Paragraph 1: District of the river Arpa Chai
(
a
)    To the southeast from Vartanli, to the east from Uzun-Kilisa over
Mt. Bozyar (5096), 5082-5047, to the east from Karmir-Vaik-Uch-Tapa
(5578), to the east from Arzaz Oghlu, to the east from Ani, reaches Arpa
Chai to the west from Yeni-Ki.
(
b
)   Leaves Arpa Chai to the east from elevation 5019, goes straight to
elevation 5481, at the distance of 4.5 versts, to the east from Kizil
Kula at 2 versts, to the east from Bojali, and then the river Digor
Chai, follows along this river to the village of Duz-Kechut, and goes
straight to the north from the ruins of Karabat and to Arpa Chai.
Paragraph 2: District of the river Araxes
A straight line between Kharaba Alijan and the village of Suleiman
(Diza).
In the districts bordered on one side by the line of the
Alexandropol-Yerevan railway and on the other by the lines which are 8
and 4 versts from the above-named railway, the Government of the Grand
National Assembly undertakes not to build any fortification and not to
keep the regular army except the number which is essentially necessary
for the maintenance of order and security. Those lines are not in the
above-named districts.
ANNEX III
Territory of Nakhichevan
Village of Ourmia, from there by a straight line to the Azerdaian
station (leaving it to SSRA), then by a straight line to Ms. Dash-Burun
west (3142), watershed of Mt. Dash-Burun east (4108), crosses the river
Kyahaanam-Darassi to the south of the inscription "Rodne" (Boulakh)
(South), following the watershed of Mt. Bgarsik (6607) or (6587), and
from there follows the administrative border of the former districts of
Erivan and of Sharur, Daralagyaz, by the elevation 6629 to the mountain
Kemurlu Dagh (6839) or (6930), and from there to the elevation 3080,
Sayat Dagh (7868), village Kurt Kulag (Kyurt Kulak), Mt. Gamessur Dagh
(8160), elevation 8022, Kuri Dagh (10,181), and the eastern
administrative border of the former district of Nakhichevan.

---
Source: Armenian News Network / Groong, "Treaty of Kars"
https://groong.org/treaties/kars.html
(English translation; original treaty languages were French and Russian)
Downloaded: 2026-08-18.
