PEACE TREATY BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND AND THE RUSSIAN SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC
(Treaty of Dorpat / Tartu)
Signed at Dorpat, October 14, 1920
Official English translation by the Secretariat of the League of Nations

Source: League of Nations Treaty Series, Vol. 3 (1921-1922), pp. 6-79 (Treaty No. 91),
registered 5 March 1921. Downloaded as official UN-hosted PDF of the printed volume:
https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/LON/Volume%203/v3.pdf
(also available via the older transcription at https://histdoc.net/history/dorpat1920_en.html,
cross-checked against this file — texts match)

NOTE: this is an OCR/text-layer extraction of the scanned 1921 printed volume (via pdftotext),
so page headers/footers, footnote markers, and occasional OCR glitches (e.g. "0" vs "o" in
coordinates, ligature artifacts) remain in the raw text below. The source page images
(official multilingual text: Finnish, Swedish, Russian, French and English side by side,
pp. 6-81 of LNTS Vol. 3) are preserved as a PDF at
maps/LNTS_vol3_treaty91_dorpat_pp6-81.pdf — consult it to resolve any OCR ambiguity below.
A clean, human-readable rendering of this same English translation (no OCR artifacts) is
also available at https://histdoc.net/history/dorpat1920_en.html and matches this text.

Extraction date: 2026-08-18

========================================================================

No. 91. - PEACE TREATY BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF FINLAND
    AND THE RUSSIAN SOCIALIST FEDERAL SOVIET REPUBLIC,
    SIGNED AT DORPAT, OCTOBER 14, 1920.

     Whereas Finland declared its independence in 1917, and Russia has recognised the independence
and the sovereignty of Finland within the frontiers of the Grand Duchy of Finland,
     The Government of the Republic of Finland, and the Government of the Federal Socialist
Republic of Soviet Russia,
     Actuated by a desire to put an end to the war which has since arisen between their States,
to establish mutual and lasting peace relations, and to confirm the situation which springs from
the ancient political union of Finland and Russia,
     Have resolved to conclude a Treaty with this object in view, and have selected as their repre-
sentatives for this purpose, the following :
     For the Government of the Republic of Finland
              M. JuHo KUSTI PAASIKIVI,
              M. JUHO HEIKKI VENNOLA,
              M. ALEXANDER FREY,
              M. KARL RUDOLF WALDEN,
              M. VAIN6 TANNER,
              M. VXIN6 VOIONMAA,
              M. VAINO GABRIEL KIVILINNA.

     For the Federal Socialist Republic of Soviet Russia:
              M. JEAN ANTONOVITCH BERZINE,
              M. PLATON MIKHAJLOVITCH KERGENTSEFF,
              M. NICOLAS SERGUEJEVITCH TIKHMENEFF.
    Who, after meeting at the town of Dorpat and exchanging their full powers, found in good
and due form, have agreed to the following provisions:


                                             Article I.
     From the date upon which this Treaty shall come into force, a state of war shall cease to exist
between the Contracting Powers, and the two Powers shall mutually undertake to maintain, for
the future, an attitude of peace and goodwill towards one another.

                                             Article 2.
     The frontier between the States of Russia and of Finland shall be as follows:
     I. Across the centre of the bay of Vaida as far as the point of the eastern promontory at
its extremity (at approximately latitude 69057'.o and longitude 31058'.5);
     Thence along the meridian southwards to the point where it cuts the Northern system of
.akes (at approximately latitude 69055'.0 ) ;

 1 Traduit par le Secretariat de la Socidt6 des      1 Translated by the Secretariat of the League

Nations.                                           of Nations.
66                       Socidt6 des Nations -       Recuedi des Traites.                       1921

    Thence in a south-easterly direction, as far as the meridian at longitude 320o8'.o (at approxi-
mately latitude 69051'.o) following as far as possible the chain of lakes of Tschervjanyja
    Thence to a point situated at latitude 69046'.o and longitude 32oo6'.5;
    Thence across the centre of the isthmus between the two bays of the fjords of Pummanki
(Bolschaja Volokovaja-Guba) and Oserko which extend farthest into the above-mentioned
isthmus, as far as the point which is in the centre of the isthmus between the peninsula of Srednig
and the mainland (at latitude 69039'.1 and longitude 31047'.6) ;
    Thence in a straight line as far as the frontier mark No. 90 of Korvatunturi, situated near the
lake of Jaurijdrvi on the former frontier between Russia and Finland.
     2. From the frontier mark No. 90 of Korvatunturi, situated near the lake of Jaurijdrvi,
to the lake of Ladoga, thence across this lake and along the Carelian Isthmus, following the line
of the former frontier between Russia and Finland up to the point where that frontier reaches
the Gulf of Finland.
         Note i. The islands of Heind (Ainovskie ostrova) and the islands of Kii are ceded to
              Finland.
         Note 2. The frontier laid down in the above article is marked by a red line in the maps
              appended to this Treaty, that is, the Russian maritime map No. 1279 and a land
              map. The frontiers mentioned in paragraph i of the above article will be fixed in
              the localities themselves in accordance with these maps, natural conditions being
              taken into consideration wherever essential. Should there be a divergence between
              the maps and the text with reference to the peninsulas " des P~cheurs " and Srednig,
              the maritime map No. 1279 shall be taken as authentic, but in all other parts of the
              frontier the text alone will be regarded as authentic.
         Note 3. All longitudes are calculated on Greenwich.

                                             Article 3.
     The breadth of the territorial waters of the contracting Powers in the Gulf of Finland shall
be four nautical miles from the coast, and, in an archipelago, from the last islet or rock above sea-
level.
     The following shall be excepted
     i. From the point where the land frontier between Russia and Finland reaches the Gulf
of Finland, to the meridian through the lighthouse of Styrsudd, the breadth of the territorial waters
of Finland shall be one nautical mile and a half, and the boundary line of these waters shall, at the
commencement, follow the parallel.
     From a point situated on the meridian of the lighthouse of Styrsudd at latitude 6ooo8'.9,
the boundary line of the territorial waters of Finland shall follow a line drawn from this point
to a point situated south of the southern point of Seitskdr (latitude 590581.8 and longitude 28024'.5)
as far as the junction of this line and the boundary line of four nautical miles constituting Finnish
territorial waters to the west of the meridian of Styrsudd.
     2. From a point situated on the meridian which cuts the southern point of Hogland, the
boundary line of the territorial waters of Finland shall follow two straight lines, the first drawn
at 610 and the second at 2880, as far as the points where these lines cut the boundary line of four
nautical miles constituting the territorial waters of Hogland.
     3. Around the islands belonging to Finland, but situated outside Finnish territorial waters,
the breadth of the territorial waters shall be three nautical miles.
     The following exceptions shall, however, be made :
     To the South of the islands of Seitskar and Lavansari, the boundary line of the territorial
waters of Finland shall pass through the following points:
         i.   Latitude 60°00'.5 and Longitude 28031'.4.
         2.        )   59058'8    )    1,     28024'.5.
         3.        )   590581.o   )    ,,     27055'.0.
         4.        )   590541.6               27052'.2.
1921                         League of Nations -            Treaty Series.                           67

      From a point situated on the meridian of the North Point of Stora Tyterskidr, at three nautical
miles north of this point, the boundary line of the territorial waters of Finland will pursue a straight
line, passing through a point situated on the meridian which passes through the North point of
Rodskar, at one nautical mile north of that point, as far as the point where the above-mentioned
line meets the boundary line of three nautical miles constituting the territorial waters of Rodskfr.
     4. Finland does not, and shall not in the future, oppose the following delimitation of Russian
territorial waters in the Eastern portion of the Gulf of Finland :
      Along the boundary line of the territorial waters of Finland, starting from the point where the
land frontier between Russia and Finland reaches the Gulf of Finland, as far as the point situated
at latitude 6ooo8'.9 upon the meridian of Styrsudd.
     Thence to a point to the south of Seitskbir at latitude 59058'.8 and longitude 280241.5.
     Thence to a point situated at latitude 59058'.o. and longitude 27055'.0.
     Thence in the direction of the Vigrund lighthouse as far as the intersection of this line and the
general boundary line, of a breadth of four nautical miles, of Russian territorial waters, and there-
after following that boundary line.
           Note i. The boundary lines of all these territorial waters are marked on the Russian
                maritime maps Nos. 1492 and 1476 annexed to this Treaty'. Should there be a diver-
                gence between the maps and the text, the maps will be taken as authentic.
           'ote 2. All longitudes are calculated on Greenwich.

                                               Article 4.
     The territoy of Petschenga included within the following boundaries:
     To the East and South East : the frontier mentioned in the first paragraph of Article 2
     To the West : the former frontier between Russia and Finland, from the frontier mark No. 90
of Korvatunturi, near the lake of Jaurijdrvi, to the triple frontier mark No. 94, where the frontiers
of Finland, Russia and Norway meet ;
     To the North-West : the former frontier between Russia and Norway
     Shall, with its territorial waters, as soon as this Treaty shall have come into force, be ceded
by Russia to Finland in perpetuity, and placed under the unrestricted sovereignty of the latter.
Russia abandons, in favour of Finland, all rights and claims to the above-mentioned territory.
     The Russian troops shall evacuate the territory of Petschenga within a period of forty-five
days from the date upon which the present Treaty shall come into force.

                                             Article 5.
     The Governments of Finland and Russia shall, within a period of one month from the date
upon which the present Treaty shall come into force, each appoint two members of a special commis-
sion which shall carry out, within a period of nine months, the delimitation and demarcation of
the frontiers mentioned in the first paragraph of Article 2.

                                               Article 6.
     1. Finland guarantees that she will not maintain, in the waters contiguous to her seaboard in
the Arctic Ocean, warships or other armed vessels, other than armed vessels of less than one hundred
tons displaccment, which Finland may keep in these waters in any number, and of a maximum
number of fifteen warships and other armed vessels, each with a maximum displacement of four
hundred tons.
     Finland also guarantees that she will not maintain, in the above-mentioned waters, submarines
or armed aeroplanes.
     2. Finland also guarantees that she will not establish on the coast in question naval ports,
bases, or repairing stations of greater size than are necessary for the vessels mentioned in the preced-
ing paragraph and for their armament.
    I Map not reproduced here.
68                        Socidte' des Nations - Recuei des TraitS.                                1921

                                               Article 7.
      i. The Contracting Powers mutually undertake to grant to the nationals of each other, fishing
rights and the right of free navigation for fishing vessels, in the territorial waters along the seaboard
ceded to Finland upon the Arctic Ocean and in those to the North and East of the peninsula " des
Pdcheurs " (Kalastajasaarento) remaining under the sovereignty of Russia, as far as Cape Schara-
poff.
      2. Nationals of the two countries shall have
                                                       the right to land upon the coast mentioned in
the preceding paragraph and to construct the buildings necessary for their accommodation and
stores, also such other buildings and equipment as may be necessary for fishery and pisciculture.
      3. The Contracting Powers undertake to conclude a special Convention, after the coming into
force of the present Treaty, with regard to the conditions and regulations to be observed by fishing
vessels in the exercise of these fishing and navigation rights in the territorial waters of the coasts
mentioned in paragraph i.

                                                Article 8.
     i. The right of free transit to and from Norway through the territory of Petschenga shall
be guaranteed to the State of Russia and to its nationals.
    2. Goods in transit from Russia to Norway through the territory of Petschenga or from
Norway to Russia by the same routes shall not be liable to inspection or control except in so far as
may be necessary for the administration of the transit services. These goods shall also be free of
customs duties and transit and other dues.
    The above-mentioned supervision of gocds in transit shall only be authorised provided that
the principles in operation in international traffic are observed in accordance with the established
practice in analogous cases.
     3. Russian nationals proceeding to Norway through the territory of Petschenga and returning
from Norway to Russia shall be allowed to pass freely on presentation of a passport issued by the
competent Russian authority.
    4. Unarmed Russian aeroplanes may fly freely over the territory of Petschenga between
Russia and Norway, provided that they observe the general regulations in force.
     5. The routes by which passengers and goods may proceed freely from Russia to Norway
and vice versa through the territory of Petschenga, and the detailed application of the provisions
contained in the preceding paragraphs, as also the organisation and form of the consular repre-
sentation of Russia in the territory of Petschenga, shall be determined in a special agreement to
be drawn up between Finland and Russia after the coming into force of the present Treaty.

                                               Article 9.
     Russian citizens domiciled in the territory of Petschenga shall, without any further formality,
become Finnish citizens. Nevertheless, those who have attained the age of 18 years may, during
the year following the entry into force of the present Treaty, opt for Russian nationality. A husband
shall opt on behal of his wife unless otherwise decided by agreement between them, and parents
shall opt on behalf of those of their children who have not attained 18 years of age.
     All persons who opt in favour of Russia shall be free, within a time limit of one year reckoned
from the date of option, to leave the territory, taking with them their movable property, free of
customs and export duties. Such persons shall retain full rights over immovable property left
by them in the territory of Petschenga.

                                               Article xo.
     Finland shall, within a time limit of forty-five days, dating from the entry into force of the
present Treaty, withdraw her troops from the Communes of Repola and Porajarvi. These Communes
shall be re-incorporated in the State of Russia and shall be attached to the autonomous territory
1921                         League of Nations -             Treaty Series.                          69

of Eastern Carelia, which is to include the Carelian population of the Governments of Archangel
and Olonetz. and which shall enjoy the national right of self-determination.

                                              Article i i.
     The Contracting Powers have adopted the following provisions for the benefit of the local
population of the Communes of Repola and Porajdrvi, with a view to a more detailed regulation
of the conditions under which the union of these Communes with the Autonomous Territory of
Eastern Carelia referred to in the preceding Article, is to take place :
     i. The inhabitants of the Communes shall be accorded a complete amnesty, as provided in
Article 35 of the present Treaty.
     2. The local maintenance of order in the territory of the Communes shall be undertaken
by a militia organised by the local population for a period of two years, dating from the entry
into force of the present Treaty.
     3. The inhabitants of these Communes shall be assured of the enjoyment of all their movable
property situated in the territory of the Communes, also of the right to dispose and make unrestricted
use of the fields which belong to or are cultivated by them and of all other immovable property
in their possession, within the limits of the legislation in force in the Autonomous Territory of Eastern
Carelia.
     4. All the inhabitants of these Communes shall be free, if they so desire, to leave Russia
within a period of one month from the date upon which this Treaty comes into force. Those persons
who leave Russia under these conditions shall be entitled to take with them all their personal
possessions and shall retain, within the limits of the existing laws in the independent territory
of Eastern Carelia, all their rights to any immovable property which they may leave in the territory
of these Communes.
     5. Citizens of Finland, and Finnish commercial and industrial associations shall be permitted
for the duration of one year from the date upon which this Treaty comes into force, to complete
in these Communes, the felling of forests to which they are entitled by contracts signed prior to
June I, 192o, and to take away the wood felled.

                                              Article 12.
    The two Contracting Powers shall on principle support the neutralization of the Gulf of Finland
and of the whole Baltic Sea, and shall undertake to co-operate in the realisation of this object.

                                              Article 13.
     Finland shall militarily neutralise the following of her islands in the Gulf of Finland : Sommard
(Someri), Nerv6 (Narvi), Seitskdr (Seiskari), Peninsaari, Lavansaari, Stora Tyterskar (Suuri
Tyt~rsaari), Lilla Tytersk5r (pieni Tytarsaari) and Rdskar. This military neutralisation shall
include the prohibition to construct or establish upon these islands any fortifications, batteries,
military observation posts, wireless stations of a power exceeding a half-kilowatt, ports of war and
naval bases, depots of military stores and war material, and, furthermore, the prohibition to station
upon these islands a greater number of troops than is necessary for maintaining order.
     Finland shall, however, be entitled to establish military observation posts on the islands of
Sommarb and Nerv6.

                                              Article 14.
      As soon as this Treaty comes into force, Finland shall take measures for the military neutra-
lisation of Hogland under an international guarantee. This neutralisation shall include the pro-
hibition to construct or establish upon this island any fortifications, batteries, wireless stations
of a power exceeding one kilowatt, ports of war and naval bases, depots of military stores and war
material, and further, the prohibition to station upon this island a greater number of troops than
 s necessary for maintaining order.
70                         Socie'td des Nations -    Recuei des Traites.                      1921

     Russia undertakes to support the measures taken with a view to obtaining the above-mentioned
international guarantee.

                                             Article 15.
     Finland undertakes to remove the gun breeches, sights, elevating and training gears, and
munitions of the fortifications of Ino and Puumala within a period of three months from the date
upon which this Treaty comes into force, and to destroy these fortifications within a period of one
year from the date upon which this Treaty comes into force.
     Finland also undertakes neither to construct armoured turrets nor batteries, with arcs of
fire permitting a range beyond the boundary line of the territorial waters of Finland upon the
coast between Styrsudd and Inonniemi, at a maximum distance of twenty kilometres from the
shore, nor batteries with a range beyond the boundary line of the territorial waters of Finland,
upon the coast between Inonniemi and the mouth of Rajajoki, at a maximum distance of twenty
kilometres from the shore.

                                             Article 16.
     i. The Contracting Powers mutually undertake to maintain no military establishments or arma-
ments designed for purposes of offence, upon Ladoga, its banks, the rivers and canals running
into Ladoga, nor upon the Neva as far as the Ivanoffski rapids (Ivanovskie porogi). In the above-
mentioned waters it shall, however, be permissible to station warships with a maximum displace-
ment of one hundred tons, and provided with guns of a maximum calibre of forty-seven millimetres,
and, furthermore, to establish military and naval bases conforming to these restrictions.
     Russia shall, however, have the right to send Russian war vessels into the navigable waterways
of the interior by the canals along the Southern Bank of Ladoga and even, should the navigation
of these canals be impeded, by the Southern part of Ladoga.
     2. Should the Gulf of Finland and the Baltic Sea be neutralised, the Contracting Powers
mutually undertake to neutralise Ladoga also.

                                             Article 17.

     Russia undertakes to allow the free navigation of the Neva, between the Gulf of Finland and
Ladoga, to Finnish merchant vessels and cargo boats on the same terms as it is allowed to Russian
vessels. The use, however, of these vessels for the transport of war material and military stores
is prohibited.
     The Contracting Powers undertake, should one of them desire it, to open negotiations within
a period not exceeding one year from the date upon which such demand is made, with a view to
concluding a special agreement to complete the provisions of the present Article. This provision
shall not, however, be allowed to prevent the exercise of the right hereby granted.

                                             Article 18.
    The level of the water of the Lake of Ladoga shall not be altered without previous agreement
between Finland and Russia.

                                             Article 19.
     Questions dealing with customs, fishing, the upkeep of maritime establishments, the maintenance
of order in the sectors in the Gulf of Finland which are outside territorial waters, the removal
of mines in this free sector of the Gulf of Finland, the uniformity of the pilot service and other
similar subjects, shall be submitted for examination to one or several Finnish-Russian Commissions.
1921                         League of Nations -            Treaty Series.                          71

                                              Article 20.
     i. The Contracting Powers shall, as soon as the Treaty comes into force, take steps to establish
an agreement for the regulation of passport and customs formalities and generally of all traffic
on the frontier of the Carelian Isthmus, taking into consideration local conditions and the practical
needs of both parties.
     2.  Traffic in other parts of the frontier between Finland and Russia shall be regulated similarly
by special agreements.
     3. As soon as this Treaty comes into force, a special mixed Commission shall be appointed
to discuss detailed plans of the work in question.

                                              Article 21.
     i. The Contracting Powers mutually undertake to open negotiations at the earliest possible
date after this Treaty comes into force, with the object of concluding an agreement upon the traffic
and rafting of forest products along the waterways which run from the territory of one of the
Contracting Powers into the territory of the other.
     This agreement shall be based upon the principle that the traffic and rafting of forest products
in the waterways of this district is permitted by both parties without restriction, both across the
frontier and in the territory of the one and of the other Contracting Power, as far as the sea.
     Similarly, and especially with regard to the rafting, the agreement shall accord to the nationals
of the two Contracting Powers the same rights which are accorded to the most favoured raftsman.
     2.  In addition, the Contracting Powers shall open the necessary negotiations with a view to
an agreement guaranteeing the maintenance of the principal channel of the waterways, and dealing
with the regulation of fishing and the improvement of pisciculture in the waterways mentioned
in the preceding paragraph, and, similarly, in those situated along the common frontier of the
Contracting Powers.
                                              Article 22.
     Property in Finland belonging to the Russian State and to Russian National Institutions
shall, without indemnification, become the exclusive property of the State of Finland. Similarly,
property in Russia belonging to the State of Finland and to Finnish Governmental Institutions
shall, without indemnification, become the exclusive property of the Russian State.
          Note. The Contracting Powers shall each retain, from amongst their former govern-
              mental properties in the other country, three urban properties with land and buildings
              for diplomatic and consular representation.

                                              Article 23.
      i. The Government of Finland undertakes to return to the Russian State, as soon as this
Treaty comes into force, a certain number of Russian ships and vessels which are at present within
its territory or in its service, and which were left in Finland in 1918. These ships and vessels shall
be returned in accordance with the specification annexed to this Treaty.
      2.  Should claims be put forward by private individuals, or by commercial or industrial asso-
ciations, with regard to ships to be restored to Russia, the Russian Government absolves the Finnish
Government from all responsibility for their return to Russia, and undertakes to assume responsi-
bility for demands for indemnification which may be presented to the Finnish Government.
The Russian Government undertakes to settle the question of the right of ownership to these
vessels, and the claims put forward on this matter must therefore be submitted to it.
      3. The Russian Government undertakes to restore to their former owners vessels belonging
to Finnish nationals or to commercial associations established in Finland, and requisitioned by the
Russian Government during the World War without indemnification of their owners, and similarly
Finnish vessels which have become the property of the Russian State without indemnification.
A list of the vessels mentioned in this Article is given in the Annex to this Treaty. [See page 252.)
72                       Socidt des Nations -       Recuei des Traites.                       1921

                                            Article 24.
     The Contracting Powers will exact no indemnity whatsoever from one another for war expenses.
     Finland will take no share in the expenses incurred by Russia in the World War of 1914-1918.

                                            Article 25.
     Neither of the Contracting Powers is responsible for the public debts and other obligations
of the other Power.
                                            Article 26.
    The debts and other obligations of the Russian State and of Russian Governmental Institutions
towards the State of Finland and the Bank of Finland, and, similarly, the debts and obligations of
the State of Finland and Finnish Governmental Institutions towards the Russian State and its
Governmental Institutions, shall be regarded as mutually liquidated.
    The agreement, therefore, which was concluded in 1917 between the Finnish and the Russian
Governments with regard to a delivery of wheat, and, similarly, the agreement with regard to the
exchange concluded in the same year between the Bank of Finland and the Chancery of Credit
Operations of the Russian Ministry of Finance, shall be regarded as cancelled.

                                            Article 27.
     Russia recognises that Finland shall not be held responsible for damage caused to vessels or
other property belonging to Nationals or to commercial Associations of a third State through
measures taken by the Russian Authorities during the World War, before the proclamation of
Finnish independence. Claims of this nature must be submitted to the Russian Government.

                                            Article 28.
     Finnish Nationals and commercial, industrial, financial and other private associations estab-
lished in Finland, as also Finnish Public Associations and Corporations shall, in so far as concerns
their property in Russia, their debts, claims for damages, indemnities and other claims upon the
Russian State or its Governmental Institutions, be accorded the same rights and advantages as
those which are accorded or shall in future be accorded by Russia to the Nationals of the Most
Favoured Nation.
                                            Article 29.
     i. The Contracting Powers undertake at the first opportunity to restore the Archives and
documents which belong to public authorities and institutions which may be within their respec-
tive territories, and which refer entirely or mainly to the other Contracting Power or its history.
     The Russian Government will therefore hand over to the Finnish Government, among
other documents, the Archives of the former Secretariat of State for the Grand Duchyof Finland,
but the documents in these Archives, which are entirely or mainly concerned with Russia or its
history, shall be left to the Russian Government. Finland shall be entitled to provide herself with
copies of the documents thus handed over to Russia.
     2. The Russian Government shall hand over to the Finnish Government copies of the most
recent topographical and hydrographical maps of Finnish territory which are in its possession,
and also the documents of the unfinished work of triangulation carried out in Finland.

                                            Article 30.
    The State of Finland agrees to reserve for the benefit of the inhabitants of the town of Petro-
grad and its surroundings, half the number of beds in the sanitorium of Halila in the Commune
of Uusikirkko, for a period of io years and on the same terms as for Finnish Nationals.
1921                         League of Nations -            Treaty Series.                          73

                                              Article 31.
     The economic relations between the Contracting Powers shall be re-established after the coming
into force of the present Treaty.
     With this object in view, the Contracting Powers shall appoint, as soon as possible, after the
coming into force of this Treaty, a special Commission composed of Representatives of the two
Powers, which shall put forward proposals with regard to the measures to be taken to regulate
commercial relations, and shall also draw up a commercial Treaty.

                                              Article 32.
       Until such time as a Commercial Treaty is concluded, the following temporary provisions
 shall be observed in commercial relations between Finland and Russia ; these provisions may be
 denounced by each of the Contracting Powers, always provided that a period of six months shall
 elapse from the date on which the other Power is informed, before they cease to be operative.
       i. Goods in transit intended for transportation across the territories of the Contracting
 Powers may be transported by all the commercial routes which are or will be open to transit traffic,
 provided, however, that the regulations for the organisation of traffic and the capacity of means
 of communication are observed, as also regulations intended to reserve the means of transport
 required by the country itself, and to ensure public safety.
      2.  Freight and other expenses charged for goods in transit on the railways or vessels belonging
 to the State shall not be higher than the charges upon goods of the same nature transported in
 their own country. For all other expenses which these goods may incur, the principle of the Most
 Favoured Nation shall be applied.
      Should the collection of dues upon the transport of domestic merchandise be completely
 abolished in Russia, the freight charges for goods in transit coming from Finland shall not be higher
 than those collected for goods in transit coming from the Most Favoured Nation.
      3. For goods sent from one country into the other, it shall be forbidden to charge higher
 freight or other expenses than those fixed for the transport of similar goods in their own country.
      Should the collection of dues on goods transported within the country be completely abolished
 in the territory of the Russian State, freight and other expenses charged for Finnish goods shall
 not be higher than those charged for goods from the Most Favoured Nation.
      4. The promulgation of prohibitions upon importation, exportation and transit is only
 permissible by either party in cases where such prohibitions are based upon legislation with regard
 to public safety, public health, alcoholic products and the regulation of commerce and all the other
 branches of economic and industrial activity of the country in question.
      5. The Contracting Powers reserve to themselves the right of exercising a monopoly over
 various branches of commerce and industry.
      6. Passenger and cargo boats belonging to one or the other of the Contracting Powers are
entitled to call at every port and make use of their facilities and to navigate the territorial waters,
lakes, rivers and canals of the other Contracting Power for as long as these waterways are or shall
in future be open to the vessels of this Power, and provided that the regulations on national vessels
which are in force in each country or which shall be promulgated, and the provisions regarding
public safety and the control of customs, are observed.
      The charges upon the vessels of the other country and their cargoes, and those collected for
the utilisation of harbour facilities, shall not be higher than the taxes upon the vessels of the Most
Favoured Nation and their cargoes.
      Coasting and fishing vessels may be excepted from these provisions. The term coasting
vessels, however, shall not include vessels navigating between the ports of the Baltic and the Ports
of other seas contiguous to Russia, including the seas in the interior of that country.
      Passenger and merchant vessels belonging to Russia shall be entitled to make use of all the
channels open to Finnish vessels in the territorial waters of Finland, provided, however, that they
respect the provisions concerning the piloting of foreign ships which are in force in Finland.
      7. Natural, domestic and industrial products of Finland shall, on their entry into Russia,
be freed from all customs duty and other import duties.
74                       Societe' des Nations - Recuei des Traits.                               1921

                                             Article 33.
     As soon as the present Treaty shall come into force, the Contracting Powers shall proceed
to take the necessary measures for the organisation of the railway service between Finland and
Russia, in such a manner as to provide a direct service for passengers and goods without changing
vehicles from Finland to Russia and from Russia to Finland, from stations situated between Raja-
joki and Petrograd, including that of Petrograd. The Contracting Powers shall also enter into
negotiations necessary for an amalgamation of the respective railway systems of the two countries
and of direct traffic between them.

                                             Article 34.
     Postal and telegraphic communications between Finland and Russia shall be re-established
after the present Treaty has come into force ; a special Convention shall be concluded between
the Contracting Powers to this effect.
     The Finnish Government shall raise no objection to placing at the exclusive disposal of Russia,
until the end of the year 1946, of the three direct telegraph lines (hitherto designated by the Nos 13,
6o and 42) which cross the territory of Finland from Rajajoki to Nystad and connect Petrograd
with Stockholm, Newcastle and Fredrickia, which lines, the Finnish Government in a contract
concluded on January 9 th, 1920, ceded to "Det Store Nordiske Telegraf-Selskab" for the Russian
Telegraphic Service, provided that the conditions of this contract with regard to the regulations
in force for telegraphic correspondence are observed. For the use of these lines, the Russian Govern-
ment shall pay to the Finnish Government the transit dues to which Finland is entitled as a sove-
reign State by virtue of the provisions of the International Telegraphic Convention and of the
regulations attached thereto. This payment shall continue until such time as these dues are
charged to the sender by an agreement between the States concerned. In the same way and for
the same period, the rights over the two cables connecting Nystad and Grisslehamn for direct
telegraphic communication with Sweden shall be reserved to the Russian Government by virtue
of the contract entered into with " Det Store Nordiske Telegraf-Selskab."

                                             Article 35.
     i. Finnish Nationals resident in Russia and Russian Nationals resident in Finland shall,
after this Treaty has come into force, be permitted to return to their country with the exception
of persons detained in one or other country for serious offences.
     2.  Prisoners of War of the two Contracting Powers shall be repatriated as soon as possible.
The Contracting Powers shall settle the manner in which this repatriation is to be carried out by
a special Convention.
     3. All other Nationals of either Power detained in the territory of the other in conseqblence
of the State of War or other political reasons shall be forthwith set at liberty and repatriated.
     4. All Finnish or Russian Nationals who have been condemned either for political offences
committed before the signature of the present Treaty in the interests of the other State, or for
communication with the troops or authorities of the other Contracting State, or for an offence
committed with the intention of giving effect to national right of self determination, shall have
any further punishment remitted and shall be forthwith set at liberty. Should the person concerned
have been accused of or detained for a crime of this nature, and should sentence not yet have been
pronounced or the prosecution not yet prepared, the right of prosecution lapses whether the person
concerned is within his own country or outside its frontiers. No subsequent prosecution on these
grounds shall be admissible.
     If that person has, by the same or any other action been guilty of a crime of another kind
against the Government or public order of his own country, and has subsequently taken refuge
upon the territory of the other Contracting Power, he shall profit by any amnesty which may
subsequently be granted in his own country for persons who have been accused and condemned
on the same grounds and who remained in the country.
1921                         League of Nations -               Treaty Series.                       75

                                                 Article 36.
    Diplomatic and consular relations between the Contracting Powers shall be re-established
immediately after the present Treaty has come into force.
    The Contracting Powers, immediately after the present Treaty has come into force, shall
draw up a consular Convention.

                                                 Article 37.
     As soon as this Treat. comes into force, a Finnish-Russian Commission shall be appointed
to deal with its execution and with all questions of public and private law which may arise
from it ; this Commission shall be empowered to appoint from amongst its Members, Sub-Com-
mittees for territorial questions, settlement of economic relations, exchange of prisoners and
fugitives, and for any other matters that may arise.
     The composition and methods of procedure of the Commission provided for in this Article
shall be settled in a subsequent Convention. The work, power and duties of the various Sub-Com-
mittees shall be arranged by means of special instructions issued by the Commission.
     Should a Sub-Committee have been unable to come to a decision by reason of an equality
of votes, the question shall be submitted to a full meeting of the Commission. Should there also
be an equality of votes in the Commission, the question shall be submitted to the Governments
for decision.

                                                 Article 38.
     The Treaty shall be prepared in Finnish, Swedish and Russian ; all three texts shall be authentic.
     At the time of the exchange of ratifications the Contracting Powers shall also sign the French
text of this Treaty, which shall also be authentic.

                                                 Article 39.
    The Treaty shall be ratified. The exchange of ratifications shall take place at Moscow.
    The Treaty shall come into force as soon as the exchange of ratifications shall have taken
place.
    IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF the Plenipotentiaries of the two Contracting Powers have signed
the Treaty and have affixed their seals thereto.
    DONE in Duplicate at Dorpat this fourteenth day of October, one thousand nine hundred
and twenty, drawn up in all the above-mentioned languages.

                                                     J. K. PAASIKIVI.
                                                     J. H. VENNOLA.
                                                     ALEXANDER FREY.
                                                     R. WALDEN.
                                                     VXIN6 TANNER.
                                                      VAIN6 KIVILINNA.
                                       (L. S.)        VAIN6 VOIONMAA.
                                       (L. S.)        JEAN BERZINE.
                                       (L. S.)       P. M. KERGENTZEFF.
                                       (L. S.)       N. TIKHMENEFF.
76                       Socidi des Nations - Recueil des Traite's.                            1921


                                             NOTE.

     i* The ships and vessels due to Russia, Finland undertakes to deliver in the ports of
Helsingfors, Viborg, and Sordavala. The ships and vessels due to Finland, Russia undertakes to
deliver in the ports of Petrograd and Cronstadt.
     2. Should one of the Contracting Powers demand that the other Power transport, on its
own responsibility, into the territorial waters of the former Power, the ships and vessels which
are to be returned, the latter Power shall be authorised to do so, provided that it pays the freight,
insurance, and other expenses. The other Power undertakes to comply with a request of this nature.
     3. The return of the vessels, and all other details, shall be arranged by a joint Finnish-
Russian commission.

    We, the undersigned, certify that the specifications here annexed are attached as a supple-
ment to the Peace Treaty between Finland and Russia.


     Dorpat, October 14th, 1920.


                                                                 ESKo HEILIMO,
                                                     Secretary ol the FinnishPeace Delegation.

                                                                  A. TCHERNYH,
                                                      Secretary o/ the Russian Peace Delegation.




DECLARATION INSERTED IN THE PROCS-VERBAL BY THE FINNISH AND
   RUSSIAN PEACE DELEGATIONS AT DORPAT, OCTOBER 14TH, i92o, AT THE
   MEETING FOR THE SIGNATURE OF THE TREATY OF PEACE BETWEEN THE
   REPUBLIC OF FINLAND AND THE SOCIALIST FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF THE
   RUSSIAN SOVIETS.

Declaration of the Russian Delegation with regard to the Autonomy of Eastern Carelia.
     At the general meeting of Peace Delegates on October 14th, the following declaration was
inserted in the Proc~s-Verbal on behalf of the Russian Delegation :
     The Socialist Federal Republic of the Russian Soviets guarantees the following rights to the
Carelian population of the Governments of Archangel and Olonetz (Aunus) :
     (i) The Carelian population of the Governments of Archangel and Olonetz (Aunus) shall
enjoy the right of self-determination.
 1921                        League of Nations -        Treaty Series.                             77

      (2) That part of Eastern Carelia which is inhabited by the said population shall constitutel
so far as its internal affairs are concerned, an autonomous territory united to Russia on a federa,
basis.
      (3) The affairs of this district shall be dealt with by national representatives elected by the
local population, and having the right to levy taxes for the needs of the territory, to issue edicts
and regulations with regard to local needs, and to regulate internal administration.
      (4) The local native language shall be used in matters of administration, legislation and public
education.
      (5) The autonomous territory of Eastern Carelia shall have the right to regulate its economic
life in accordance with its local needs, and in accordance with the general economic organisation
of the Republic.
      (6) In connection with the reorganisation of the military defensive forces of the Russian
Republic, there shall be organised in the autonomous territory of Eastern Carelia a militia system,
having as its object the suppression of the permanent army and the creation in its place of a national
militia for local defence.


                          Declaration of the Russian Delegation
              concerning the position of the Population of Russian Ingria.

     At the general meeting of the Peace Delegations on October I 4 th, the following declaration
was inserted in the Procs-Verbal in the name of the Russian Delegation :
     The Russian Delegation proclaims, on behalf of the Socialist Federal Republic of the Russian
Soviets, that the Finnish population of the Government of Petrograd is granted full enjoyment
of all the same rights and advantages that Russian law gives to national minorities. This
particularly refers to the following points :-
     The above-mentioned Finnish population has the right:
     Freely to regulate, within the limits of general laws and regulations, its public education and
teaching, its communal and inter-communal administration and its local judicial organisation.
     To take all necessary measures with a view to developing its economic position ;
     To attain the above-mentioned ends by means of the necessary organisations of its representa-
tives and of its executive authorities, which organisations shall be subsidised out of the public
funds in an adequate manner in accordance with the laws in force ;
     To make free use of the language of the local population for public education and teaching and
for other internal affairs.



Declaration of the Russian Delegation with regard to an Amnesty for War Refugees.

     At the general meeting of the Peace Delegates on October i 4 th, the following declaration
was inserted in the Procs-Verbal on behalf of the Russian Delegation :
     In accordance with the Article of the Treaty of Peace between Finland and Russia with regard
to the armistice, persons belonging to the Finnish population of the Government of Petrograd
and to the Carelian population of the Governments of Olonetz (Aunus) and Archangel, who have
fled from their homes, shall be granted a complete political amnesty and the right to return to
their homes.
     In consequence, the Soviet Government restores to them the economic rights enjoyed by
Russian citizens in accordance with general laws and regulations. The Soviet Government is like-
wise disposed to take energetic measures with a view to bettering the lot of the refugees who return
to their homes, and whose means of subsistence have been annihilated as a result of the destruction
of houses and other structures and property, and by lack of seed.
78                       Socidet des Nations -      Recuei des Traitis.                         1921

                         Declaration by the Russian Delegation
                  with regard to the Parishes of Repola and Porajfirvi.

     At the General Meeting of the Peace Delegations on October 14th, the following Decla-
rationwas inserted in the Procs-Verbal on behalf of the Russian Delegation :
     The Russian delegation considers that the inhabitants of the parishes of Repola and Pora-
jarvi are entirely safeguarded by the clauses inserted in the Treaty of Peace and by the rights of
autonomy which will be enjoyed by the whole of the autonomous district of Eastern Carelia. With
a view to removing any other possible causes of anxiety, the Russian Delegation declares that
unless Finland stations troops in this frontier district, or unless this district is threatened with
War, Russia will not maintain troops or other armed forces in the territory of these communes
during the course of the next two years, with the exception of a small number of guards for frontier
 and customs supervision.


Declaration by the Finnish Delegation regarding the Property and Debts in Russia of
    Finnish Subjects, commercial Companies and other Associations and Institutions,
    and also concerning the appointment of Military and Naval Attaches.

     At the general meeting of the Peace Delegations on October 14th, the following Declaration
was inserted in the Procs-Verbal on behalf of the Russian Delegation :
     As we have often represented on previous occasions, questions concerning debts and demands
for damages, compensation, and other claims by Finnish subjects, commercial companies, and other
associations and institutions against the Russian State or against the Russian Government insti-
tutions, no matter of what nature these claims may be, are outside the scope of the present Peace
Treaty. Nothing has therefore been decided in regard to these claims except what Russia has
guaranteed in this respect (by Article 28 of the Peace Treaty).
     This statement, of course, applies also to the rights and debts of the owners of Finnish vessels,
whose vessels are in Russia and who are unable to obtain possession of these vessels by virtue of
Article 23.
     Further, the two Delegations have agreed that neither of the Contracting Powers will raise
any objection, after normal diplomatic relations have been restored, to the other Power sending
it military and naval attachds according to the generally accepted international usage.
1921                        League of Nations -        Treaty Series.                           79

                              1 TRADUCTION -         TRANSLATION


   PROCES-VERBAL OF SIGNATURE.                                   PROCtS-VERBAL.
    In accordance with Article 38 of the Treaty       The undersigned, duly authorised by their
of Peace, the President of the Finnish Republic     Governments, met together to-day at the
instructed M. Vdin6 Voionmaa, Professor of the      People's Commissariat for Foreign Affairs in
University of Helsingfors, to sign the French       order to carry out the exchange of the instru-
text of the said Treaty on behalf of MM. J. K.      ments of ratification of the Treaty of Peace
Paasikivi, J. H. Vennola, Alexander Frey,           concluded between Finland and Russia, at
L. R. Walden, V~in6 Tanner, and Vdin6 Kivi-         Dorpat, on October 14th, 192o.
 linna.                                               The instruments of ratification having been
   After the full powers conferred upon M. Voion-   presented and found entirely correct and in
maa had been presented to citizens J. A. Ber-       conformity with the originals, the exchange of
zine, P. M. Kergentzeff and N. S. Tikhmeneff,       these instruments took place according to
duly authorised by the Government of the            custom, and the entry into force of the Treaty
Socialist Federal Soviet Republic of Russia         was placed on record.
to sign the Treaty of Peace between Finland
and Russia, as well as all relevant Acts, found       In witness whereof the undersigned drew
in good and true form, the above-mentioned          up this proc~s-verbal in duplicate, signed it,
Delegates thereupon proceeded to the signing        and affixed their seals thereto.
 of the French text.                                  Done at Moscow, on December thirty-first,
                                                    nineteen hundred and twenty.
   In witness whereof the present procs-verbal
was drawn up to which the undersigned have
affixed their signatures and seals.                              (L. S.) A. AHONEN.
                                                                 (L. S.) VAIN6 VOIONMAA.
   Done in duplicate, at Moscow, on December                     (L. S.) GEORGE TCHITCHERIN.
thirty-first, ninetecn hundred and twenty.
                                                                 (L. S.) N. KARAKHAN.
              (L. S.)   VAINb VOIONMAA.                          (L. S.) N. LITVINOFF.
              (L. S.)   JEAN BERZINE.
              (L. S.)   P. M. KERGENTZEFF.
              (L. S.)   N. TIKHMENEFF.




   Traduit par Ie Secretariat de la Socidt6 des       1 Translated by the Secretariat of the League
