Treaty of Alexandropol: December 2, 1920

On the one part the Turkish Government and on the other part the Armenian Republic, for the
purpose of putting an end to the hostilities and to find a thesis of agreement, have sat down for
an examination of the facts.
On the part of the Turkish Government:
General Kazim Kara-Bekir Pasha, Commander on the Eastern Front
Hamid Boy, Vali of Erzrum
Suleyman Negati Bey of Erzrum
On the part of the Armenian Republic:
Alexander Khadissian, Prime Minister
Avram Gulhandanian, Minister of Finance
Stepan Gorganian, Minister of the Interior
After due verification of their powers of attorney and the validity of their certificates of
authority, the discussions have resulted in the following agreement:
1. State of war between Turkey and the Armenian Republic has been ended.
2. The frontier between Turkey and Armenia, (starting from the mouth of the Lower Karasou,
the River Arax, the Arpatchai, north to Kekatch, from thence to the valley of Karahan, eastern
Teghnis, eastern Great Kemel, Kiziltash, major Aghbaba Mountains) is the limit, The final
determination of the frontier will he decided by a mixed commission on the spot two weeks
after the signature.
Armenia will not interfere in the administrative form to be chosen by general election and that
administration's jurisdiction in Mount Kouki 10,282 - 8022 - Mount Gamasour, 8160 - the
village of Koutoulak - Mount Saat, 7868, - the houses in Arpatchai, 3080, Mount Kemourlu,
6930 - Sarayboulak, 8071 - the station Ararat - the southern part of the estuary of the Lower
Karasou on the Araxe River (Nakhitchevan, Shahtakhti, Shamour) and the administration of
this zone shall be under Turkish protection. [The numerals above are those on a military map
of the time.]
3. The Government of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey may be able to consider the
wishes of the Armenian Republic about the relocation of the entire native population back
into the territories designated in the second article, existing in the old Ottoman boundaries
which shall remain to Turkey, by irrefutable historical, ethnic and legalistic rights accepts
their return by a general election within those territories, within three years after the
ratification of this treaty. A mixed commission will decide the form of this.
4. So that the possibility of villainous activities and movements resulting from the incitements
of imperialistic governments be once for all and permanently prevented and disallowed the
Republic of Erevan undertakes not to maintain any military organization beyond a
gendarmerie corps of 1500 riflemen with 8 mountain or field guns and 20 machine guns for
the protection of its internal peace. There will be no military conscription in Armenia any
more. The Armenian Republic is free to build fortifications and place in them as many heavy
1

artillery pieces as it wishes for the protection of the country against external enemies. In this
heavy artillery are 15 cm. shells and 15 cm. long rifles that can be used, and lesser ones used
in field armies. No larger guns will be found.
5. After the peace the Government of Erevan accepts to permit the Turkish representative or
ambassador in Erevan to be free to investigate all these matters at any time. In return for that
the Grand National Assembly promises military assistance to Armenia in any internal or
external trouble.
6. The two parties permit the return of refugees to their hearths across the old boundaries with
the exception of those who, during the general war, went to the enemy's army and took arms,
and those who crossed occupied territories and participated in massacres, and mutually assure
the privileges of minorities obtained in the most-civilized countries to those who repatriate
themselves.
7. Those of the refugees mentioned in Article 6 who do not return to their hearths within the
limit of one year after the ratification of this treaty, besides not being able to benefit from the
generosity of the said article, their legal claims also will not be heard.
8. Despite the great expenses which the Grand Assembly of Turkey incurred for its army
during two years because of the urgency of the war it had to wage against Armenia, it
renounces its right to demand lawful damages, and in the same manner the two parties forego
their rights to ask for damages because of the changes which took place as a result of the
general war.
9. The Grand National Assembly of Turkey promises to render assistance in the most sincere
manner for the complete formulation and defense of the Armenian Republic mentioned in the
Second Article with utmost integrity.
10. The Erevan Government declares and considers void and null the Treaty (of Sevres)
which was absolutely rejected by the National Grand Assembly of Turkey, and by recalling
the delegations who have been tools in the hands of the imperialist countries and their
government circles in the purlieus 2of Europe and America, promises its determination to
eliminate all kinds of misunderstandings between the two countries; the Republic of Erevan
promises to keep away from government circles those pugnacious men who run after
imperialist aims and play havoc with the peace of the two nations so that it may give proof of
its sincerity for the maintenance of peace and tranquility and the rights of Turkey as a good
neighbor.
11. The Armenian Republic admits and vouchsafes the authority of the vicar of the chief of
Sheri of the National Grand Assembly of Turkey to ratify the appointment of the chief Mufti,
elected by the direct vote of muftis as well as the organization and enactment of the rights of
the people living in the country for the realization of their aspirations and religious
sentiments. [The chief Mufti and muftis were to be quartered in Armenia for the benefit of
Moslems living there].
12. The two contracting parties mutually promise not to hinder the free passage of any person
or any merchandise belonging to any person on all routes (also of Armenia and Iran), from
side to side, by sea and between any country in transit operations. The Turkish government
assures the freedom of transit operations between Sharour, Nakhitchevan, Shahtakht, and
Djoulfa via Iran, Magou and Armenia.
2

The Armenian government promises not to impede general transit operations of merchandise,
carriages, railroad wagons between Azerbaijan, Iran, Georgia and Turkey.
The Turkish State will take all railroads and transportation routes in the Erevan Republic
under its own control in order to prevent treacherous acts against its integrity and totality by
imperialists until complete peace is established and the two parties will forbid the official and
unofficial agents of imperialist (Entente) powers from causing any damage or disturbance
inside the Republic.
13. The government of the National Grand Assembly can take temporary military preventive
measures in Armenia against attacks that may threaten its territorial integrity on condition that
such measures do not disturb the rights of the Republic of Erevan conceded in this territory.
14. All treaties signed by the Republic of Erevan with any country that relate to Turkey or are
harmful to the interests of Turkey, the said Republic agrees to consider absolutely null and
void.
15. Commercial relations between the two parties will begin and ambassadors and consuls
will be exchanged upon the signature of the treaty.
16. Regulations for telegraphic, postal, telephone, consular and commercial relations will be
established by mixed commissions according to the provisions of this treaty. Meanwhile
Turkey will be authorized by the State to resume telegraphic, postal and railroad
communications between Armenia and occupied territories as soon as the treaty is signed.
17. In accordance with this treaty, concerning Armenia, by the provisions of the special treaty
for the evacuation of territories under Turkish occupation and the repatriation and exchange of
prisoners, the determination of the frontiers of the Armenian Republic will immediately be
put into effect. The civilians and notables held will be delivered. The exchange of prisoners
will be effected by a mixed commission.
18. This treaty is subject to ratification within a month. The ratified copies will be exchanged
at Ankara. The plenipotentiary high representatives have signed this treaty of peace and
frontier demarcation. This treaty, being in two copies, has been constituted at GyumriAlexandropol on the date 2/12/1336*. In the case of any dispute agreement can be arrived at
by reference to the Turkish text."
* December 2, 1920. The Turkish year 1336 corresponds to 1920 A.D

A reproduction of the original treaty in Turkish, together with a translation into modern
Turkish, appeared in Vol. II, No. 1 of "Die Welt Des Islams" ("The World of Islam"),
published by E. J. Brill, Leiden, Holland.
Die von der armenischen Delegation in Paris veröffentlichte Version, abgedruckt in Shavarsh
Toriguian: „Armenian Question and International Law“, Hamaskaine Press, Beirut-Libanon,
1973, weicht in einigen Passagen von der hier abgedruckten Fassung ab.
http://western-armenia.org/TreatyofAlexandropol.php
3


---
Source: Defense Council of Western Armenia / western-armenia.org, English translation
(also mirrored via Deutsch-Armenische Gesellschaft e.V.):
https://www.deutscharmenischegesellschaft.de/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/Vertrag-von-Alexandropol-2.-Dezember-1920.pdf
Original page: http://western-armenia.org/TreatyofAlexandropol.php
Downloaded: 2026-08-18.
Note: this is an independent English translation (not an official treaty
language) and differs in wording from the Turkish and Russian texts in
this folder in places, though the substance of each article matches.
