--- page 122 ---
- Recuei des Traits.                             1921



                   2 TRANSLATION.


    No. 94. - PEACE TREATY BE-
      TWEEN LITHUANIA AND THE
      RUSSIAN SOCIALIST FEDERAL
      REPUBLIC, AND PROTOCOL,
      SIGNED AT MOSCOW ON JULY
       12, 1920.


       RUSSIA on the one part and LITHUANIA on
    the other part, being guided by a firm desire
    to establish, on the principles of right and jus-
    tice, lasting foundations for future relations,
    guaranteeing to both countries and their peo-
    ples all the benefits of peace and good neigh-
    bourship, have decided to enter into negotia-
    tions for such purpose and have appointed as
     their representatives to this end:
      THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN SOCIA-
    LIST   FEDERATED   SOVIET       REPUBLIC:-


      Adolf Abramovitch JOFFE,
     Julian Josephovitch MARCHLEVSKi, and
     Leonid Leonidovitch OBOLENSKII;
            and
     THE GOVERNMENT OF THE LITHUANIAN DE-
    MOCRATIC REPUBLIC :-
     Thomas NARUSEVICIUS,
     Peter KLIMAS,
      Simon ROZENBAUM,
      Josef VAILOKAITIS, and
      Witovt RACKAUSKAS.

      The said representatives having mutually
    produced their powers, which were found
    drawn up in proper form and in due order,
    agreed as follows :-

                       Article i.
      Proceeding from the right, proclaimed by
    the Russian Socialist Federated Soviet Republic,
      1 Translated by the Secretariat of the League
    of Nations.
n     2Translation communicated by His Britannic
    Majesty's Foreign Office.
--- page 123 ---
-   Treaty Series.                           123

of all nations to free self-determination up to
their complete separation from the State into
the composition of which they enter, Russia
recognises without reservation the sovereign
rights and independence of the Lithuanian
State, with all the juridical consequences
arising from such recognition, and voluntarily
and for all time abandons all the sovereign
rights of Russia over the Lithuanian people
and their territory.
   The fact of the past subjection of Lithuania
to Russia does not impose on the Lithuanian
nation and its territory any liabilities what-
soever towards Russia.

                   Article 2.
   The State frontier between Russia and
Lithuania proceeds :-
   Commencing from the point of the junction
of the Gorodnianka river with the l3obr river
at 2 versts on the east of the Tsharnylias vil-
lage along the Gorodnianka small stream be-
tween the villages of Khmelniki and Khmelevka
and the villages of Levki and Olsha ; from there
along the dried-up watercourse to the southern
side of the village of Veselovo; from there
along the unnamed tributary of the small
stream Kamennaya to the junction of this tri-
butary with the aforesaid small stream Ka-
mennaya at a distance of about a verst from
the village of Veselovo. Farther, up the flow
of the small stream Kamennaya for a distance
of about one verst ; from there along the dried-
up watercourse roughly in the direction of the
eastern side of the village of Nerasnaya right
up to the source of the unnamed tributary
of the small stream Siderka; farther, along
this tributary to its confluence with the small
stream Siderka at a distance of about one verst
from the village of Siderka ; from there along
the flow of the Siderka (Siderianka) small
stream, between the villages of Shestaki and
Siderka, past the town of Sidra, between the
villages of Yuashi and Ogorodniki, past the
village of Beniashi, past the village of Litvinka,
between the villages of Zveriany and Timani up
to the village of Lovtshiki ; from there along
the dried-up -watercourse in the direction of
the southern outskirts of the village Volkusha ;
from there to the northern side of the village
of Tshuprinovo ; farther, up the elevation with
the trigonometric point io8.o, which is at a
distance of about one verst on the south of the
village of Novodeli; farther, in a direction
--- page 124 ---
 -   Recuedi des Traites.                     1921

    towards the northern side of the environs of
    Toltshi, at a distance of roughly one verst on
    the north of same ; from there in a direction
 ; towards the southern side of the village of
    Dubovaya; farther, along the small stream
    Indurka, past the village of Luzhki, past the
    town of Indura, past the village of Prokopitshi,
    past the village of Belevo ; farther, along the
    small stream Lashanka, past the village of
    Bobrovniki, and, farther, along this small stream
    to its junction with the small stream Svislotsh.
- Farther, along the small stream Svislotsh up
- to its junction with the Neman river ; from there
    along the Neman river to the mouth of the
    Berezina river along the Berezina, Islotsh and
e Volozhinka rivers along the western side of
    the town of Volozhin and along the northern
- side of the villages of Brilki, Burlaki and Po-
a likshovstshizna ; from there to the north-east
    along the eastern side of the villages of Melashi
- and Gintovtshizna (Menzhikovtshizna) at about
e one verst from them ; farther, towards the
e north-east in the direction of the western side
- of the town of Kholkhlo at a distance of about
 t one verst from the same ; farther, towards the
- western side of the village of Sukhonarovsts-
e hizna at a distance of about one verst from it.
 - From there the frontier turns north-east to-
n wards the western side of the village of Bere-
 - zovtzy at a distance of about one verst from it ;
e farther, towards the north-east in the directoin
e of the western side of the village of Vaskovtzy ;
 . from there in the direction of the western
 t side of the village of Lialkovtshizna at a dis-
 - tance of about one verst from it ; from there
h it turns to the north towards the western side
 - of the village of Kulevshizna, and from there
e to the north between the villages of Dreni
d and Zherlaki; from there to the north-west
 ; along the eastern side of the village of Gara-
e vina and the western side of the village of
 a Adamovitchi ; farther, towards the eastern side
 e of the village of Myslevitchi ; farther, along
  ; the eastern side of the village of Bukhovstts-
 a hina, towards the station of Molodetshno,
 e crossing the railway junction in such a manner,
e that the Vilno-Molodetshno-Lida railway line
 hi remains in Lithuanian territory, and the
 t   Vileika-Molodetshno-Minsk railway line in Rus-
 e sian territory ; from there along the small
 t stream Bukhovka to its junction with the
 a small stream Usha; along this small stream
 - Usha to the village of Usha; from there it
 u turns north-east and passes along the dried-up
  - watercourse on the western side of the villages
--- page 125 ---
-   Treaty Series.                          125

 of Slobodka, Dolgaya and Prenta ; from there
 along the small stream Narotch, and near the
 village of Tsheremstshitza, at a distance of
 about one verst from the same, it turns north-
 ward and passes along the eastern shore of
 the Bliada lake; at a distance of about one
 verst from same it proceeds northward across
 the Miastra lake, and upon issuing from this
lake, along the dried-up watercourse between
 the village of Pikoltzy on the western side, and
 the village of Mintshaki on the eastern side
 farther, northward and on the western side
 of the village of Volotshek at a distance ot
 about one verst from it ; from there north-
 ward across the Madziol lake to the western
side of the village of Pshegrode at a distance
of about one verst from same ; from there
towards the source of the Miadzelka small
stream, and along this small stream to its
junction with the I)isna river; from there
 the frontier proceeds along the dried-up water-
course north-eastward towards the western
side of the village of Borovyia, at a distance
of about one verst from the same ; farther,
north-eastward in a direction across the Mikha-
lishki lake ; farther, along the small stream
Nistshenka to the parallel of the Ozyraitzy
lake, to the western edge of the Repistshe
lake, to the western outskirts of Zamosbie ;
to the Zolva lake ; along the small stream Zol-
vitza, across the Dryviaty lake to the Tzno
lake and Neslizha lake ; farther, northward
across the Nedrovo lake, and from this lake
along the Druika river to its intersection with
the boundary line of the province of Kovno ;
farther, along the boundary line of the pro-
vince of Kovno, and, farther, to the Western
Dvina river near the Shafranovo farm.
       REMARK I.
  The frontier line between Lithuania and
Poland, and between Lithuania and Latvia,
will be fixed by arrangement with these States.
       REMARK 2.
   The State frontier between the two con-
tracting parties shall be established in situ,
and the frontier marks shall be fixed by a
mixed commission having an equal number
of representatives on both sides. In establish-
ing the frontier in situ the mixed commission
shall be guided by ethnographic and economic
features, keeping as far as possible to the
natural lines of division, and inhabited points
shall as far as possible enter wholly into the
--- page 126 ---
- Recuei des Traits.                           1921

    composition of one State. In those cases where
    the frontier is carried along lakes, rivers and
    canals, it shall pass through the middle of
    these lakes, rivers and canals, unless other-
    wise provided for in this treaty.

          REMARK 3.
      The frontier herein described has been deli-
    neated in red line on the map hereto annexed 1.
      In the event of any disagreement between the
    map and text, the text shall be the deciding
    factor.
           REMARK 4.
       The artificial diversion of water from the
    frontier rivers and lakes, causing a lowering
    of the average level of the water of same, is
    not permitted.
       The order and conditions of navigation and
    fishing in these rivers and lakes shall be deter-
    mined by a special arrangement, and fishing
    may only be carried on by means which do not
    exhaust the fishing resources.
                       Article 3.
s      The conditions relating to the protection
    of the frontier, as also custom-house and other
    questions connected therewith, will be regu-
    lated by a separate agreement between the
e   contracting parties after the occupied loca-
    lities dividing Lithuania and Russia shall
    have been freed of occupation.
                       Article 4.
       Both contracting parties undertake -
e      (i) Not to permit on their territory the
    formation and sojourn of the Governments,
-   organisations or groups, who have for their
e   object armed warfare against the other con-
    tracting party. Similarly not to permit within
    their territories the recruiting and mobilisation
6   of effectives for the armies of such Govern-
-   ments, organisations or groups, and the sojourn
    of their Governments and officials.
       (2) To prohibit those countries who are
-   de facto in a state of war with the other of
e   the contracting parties, and also organisations
,   or groups, who have as their object armed
e   warfare against the other contracting party,
    the importation into their ports and the trans-

      I Not reproduced.
--- page 127 ---
-   Treaty Series.                             127

port through their territories of all that may
be made use of against the other contracting
party, such as : armed forces, military equip-
ment, technical war supplies and artillery,
commissariat, engineering and flying mate-
rials.

                    Article 5.
  In the event of international recognition
of the permanent neutrality of Lithuania,
Russia on its part undertakes to conform to
such neutrality and to participate in the gua-
rantees for the maintenance of same.

                    Article 6.
   Persons resident at the date of the ratifi-
 cation of this treaty within the confines of
Lithuania, who themselves or whose parents
have permanently resided in Lithuania, or
who were registered with the rural, municipal
or corporate bodies in the territory of the Lithua-
nian State, and also persons, who prior to 1914
were residing in the territory of the same
State for not less than the last ten years and
had a permanent occupation there, excepting
former civil and military officials not of Lithua-
nian origin and the members of their families,
shall ipso facto be considered citizens of the
Lithuanian State.
   Persons of the same category, residing at
the time of the ratification of this treaty in
the territory of a third State, but not natura-
lised there, are equally considered to be Lithua-
nian citizens
   However, all persons who have attained the
age of 18 years and are resident in the terri-
tory of Lithuania, are entitled within the
period of one year from the date of the rati-
fication of this treaty to declare their wish
to opt for Russian citizenship, and their citi-
zenship shall extend to the children under
18 years of age and to the wife, if no other
arrangement has been made between the hus-
band and wife.
   Similarly, persons residing in the territory
of Russia and coming under the first para-
graph of this article, may within the same
period and on the same conditions opt for
Lithuanian citizenship.
   Those who have made a declaration of opta-
tion and also those who follow their citizenship,
shall retain their rights to personal and real
--- page 128 ---
-   Recueil des Traitds.                         1921

    property within the limits of the laws in force
    in that State in which they reside, but must
    within a year from the date of handing in the
    declaration leave its confines, they being
    entitled to realise all their property or to take
    the same away with them.
           REMARK I.
       For persons residing in the Caucasus and
    Russia in Asia, the periods indicated in this
    article for lodging the declarations, and also
    for departure, are extended by one year.
          REMARK 2.
      The rights of optants indicated in this article
    shall be enjoyed by those citizens also who
    prior to and during the world war were resi-
    dent in the territory of one side, but at the
    moment of the ratification of this treaty reside
    in the territory of the other.
      Fugitives, with regard to their property
    which they were unable to take out of the
    country   under   the   re-evacuation   of   Fugi-
-   tives Treaty of the 3oth June, 1920, enjoy
    the same rights as are provided for in this
    article in regard to optants, but only in so far
-   as they do prove that such property belongs
    to them and was at the time of the re-evacua-
    tion in their actual possession.

                        Article 7.
      Fugitives of both contracting parties, who
    desire to return to their country of origin, shall
    be returned to such country at the earliest
    possible date.
-     The order and conditions of re-evacuation
s   are to be established by arrangement between
    the Governments of the contracting parties.

                        Article S.
      Both contracting parties mutually renounce
    all accounts whatsoever arising from the fact
a   of Lithuania having in the past belonged to
-   the past Empire of Russia, and acknowledge
-   that State property of various denominations,
6   existing on the territory of either of them, cons-
    titutes the inalienable property of the respec-
-   tive State. However, if property thus belonging
-   to Lithuania has been removed from its ter-
s   ritory after the ist August, 1914, by a third
    State, the right of claiming same passes to the
    Lithuanian State.
s     To the Lithuanian State are transferred all
--- page 129 ---
s-   Treaty Series.                             129
 the claims of the Russian Treasury burdening
 properties situated within the Lithuanian State,
 and also all claims against Lithuanian citizens,
 but only for the amounts not liquidated by
 counter-claims subject to acceptance in pay-
 ment on account.
        RELMARK.
    The right of claiming from small peasants
 their debts to the former Russian Peasants'
 Land Bank and others, now nationalised Rus-
 sian land banks, and also the right of claiming
 the debts due to the former Russian Noble-
 men's Land Bank and others, now nationa-
 lised Russian land banks, secured on landed
 estates, in the event of such estates passing
 into the possession of small and landless pea-
 sants, are not transferred to the Lithuanian
 Government, but are considered cancelled.


    The documents and deeds, in proof of the
 titles referred to in this article, shall be deliv-
 ered by the Russian Government to the
 Lithuanian Government as far as they are
 actually in the possession of the former. In
 the event of it being impossible to effect this
 within the period of one year from the date
 of the ratification of the present treaty, such
 documents and deeds shall be deemed to be
 lost.

                     Article 9.
    (i) The Russian Government shall return
 at its expense to Lithuania, and shall hand
 over to the Lithuanian Government, the
libraries, archives, museums, objects of vertu,
educational supplies, documents, and other
property of educational establishments, scien-
tific, governmental, religious, communal and
professional institutions, in so far as the said
objects have been removed beyond the limits
of Lithuania during the world war of 1914-
1917, and which actually are or shall prove to
be in the keeping of the governmental or com-
munal establishments of Russia.
   As regards the archives, libraries, museums,
objects of vertu, and documents, which are
of material scientific, artistic, or historical
value to Lithuania, and had been removed
from the confines of Lithuania to Russia
prior to the world war of I914-1917, the Rus-
sian Government agrees to return the same
to Lithuania, in so far as their elimination
--- page 130 ---
-   Recuel des Traites.                         1921

    may not cause serious deficiencies in the Rus-
    sian archives, libraries, museums, picture gal-
    leries, in which they are kept.
       The questions relating to such elimination
    are to be dealt with by a special mixed commis-
    sion of an equal number of members of the
    two contracting. parties.
       (2)  The Russian Government shall return
    at its expense, and shall hand over to the
    Lithuanian Government, all the judicial and
    governmental dossiers, judicial and govern-
    mental archives, including amongst these also
    the archives of senior and junior notaries, the
    archives of mortgage registries, the archives of
    the Consistorial Departments of all confessions,
    the archives and plans of the surveying, land-
    establishment, foiestal, railway, roadway, postal
    and telegrapnic and other offices, the plans,
    drawings, maps and, generally, all the mate-
    rial of the topographical section of the mili-
    tary district of \ilno, removed during the
    world war of 1914-1917 from the confines of
    Lithuania, in so far as they refer to the terri-
    tory of the Lithuanian State; the archives
    of the local branches of the noblemen's and
    peasants' banks, of the branches of the State
    bank and of all other credit, co-operative,
    mutual assurance establishments ; also the
    archives and affairs of private establishments
    of Lithuania in so far as all the said objects
    actually are or shall prove to be in the kee-
    ping of governmcntal or communal establish-
    ments of Russia.
      (3) The Russian Government shall return
    at its expense, and shall hand over to the
e   Lithuanian Government for delivery to whom-
    soever it may concern, all kinds of title deeds,
    such as : purchase and mortgage deeds, agree-
    ments of lease, all kinds of cash securities, etc.
    including amongst these books, papers and
    documents required to effect settlements, and,
    generally, documents which are of importance
    for determining the ownership and legal titles
    of Lithuanian citizens, and which have been
    removed from the confines of Lithuania during
    the world war of 1914-1917, as far as the same
-   actually are or shal prove to be in the keeping
    of governmental or communal establishments
    of Russia. In the event of their not being
    returned within two years from the date of the
    ratification of this treaty, such documents
    shall be deemed to be lost.
--- page 131 ---
-   Treaty Series.                           131

   (4) As regards parts of the archives of the
central establishments which relate to the
territory of Lithuania and which are subject
to elimination, there is to be a special arrange-
ment, for which purpose a mixed commission
of an equal number of members of the two
contracting parties is to be appointed.


                   Article io.
   (I) The Russian Government shall return
at its expense, and shall hand over to the
Lithuanian Government for delivery to whom-
soever it may concern, the property of com-
munal, benevolent, culture, educational esta-
blishments, and also the bells and utensils of
churches and places of worship of all denomi-
nations which have been evacuated during the
world war of 1914-1917, in so far as the said
objects actually are or shall prove to be in the
keeping of the governmental or communal
establishments of Russia.
   (2)  (a) As regards the payments in savings
banks, deposits, guarantees and other amounts
paid into the former Russian governmental
and judicial establishments, as far as such
payments and amounts belong to citizens of
Lithuania,
   (b) as regards deposits or amounts of various
descriptions paid into the branches of the State
bank and into the nationalised and liquidated
credit establishments, and their branches, in so
far as such deposits and amounts belong to
citizens of Lithuania, the Russian Government
binds itself to admit to the Lithuanian citizens
all those rights which at the time were admitted
to all Russian citizens, and, therefore, grant
permission to Lithuanian citizens, who in con-
sequence of the occupation were not able to
make use at the time of these their rights, to
make use of the same now and to receive com-
pensation for their claims in paper money values
which have currency in the Russian Republic
at the time such compensation is paid, and
at the rate of exchange of the paper rouble
existing on the internal money market at the
time of the final occupation of Lithuania, that
is, on the ist September, 1915.
  As regards securities and properties now
kept, and which have been kept, at the offices
of the banks and in their safes, as far as such
securities and properties belong to citizens of
Lithuania, the conditions set out in the first
paragraph of this clause are to apply.
--- page 132 ---
    - Recuei des Traits.                         1921

         The sums, securities and properties men-
      tioned in this article are to be handed over to
      the Lithuanian Government for delivery to
      whomsoever it may concern.
         (3) The Russian Government shall return
      at its expense, and hand over to the Lithuanian
      Government the funds which are intended for
      the endowment of stipends for the educa-
      tional establishments of Lithuania and for the
      Lithuanian citizens in the educational estab-
      lishments in Russia.
         (4) As regards payment of Russian mone-
      tary assignats, securities, governmental or
      state-guaranteed, and also private securities
      issued by companies and institutions, the
      undertakings of which have been nationalised
      by the Russian Government and which are
      circulating within the confines of Lithuania,
      and also as regards satisfaction of claims by
      Lithuanian citizens against the Russian Exche-
      quer and against the nationalised institutions,
      Russia binds herself to allow Lithuania and
      Lithuanian citizens all those privileges, rights
      and preferences which are directly or indi-
      rectly granted by her or which may be granted
      to any third State or to its citizens, compa-
      nies and institutions.
         In the event of the securities and title deeds
-     not being available, the Russian Government
-     expresses its willingness, in the case of the
      application of this clause of this article, to
      recognise as the holders of the securities and
      others those who submit adequate proofs of
      the evacuation of the papers belonging to them
      during the war.

                        Article ii.
         (I) The Russian Government shall return
      to the Lithuanian Government, for delivery
a     to whomsoever it may concern, the property
      of Lithuanian citizens or partnerships, compa-
      nies and joint stock companies, the majority
a     of the stock or shares of which at the time of
      the promulgation of the respective decrees of
      nationalisation by the Russian Government,
      belonged to Lithuanian citizens, and which
      had been evacuated during the world war of
      1914-1917, in so far as such property actually
      is or shall prove to be in the keeping of the
      Russian Government.
             REMARK.
        The present clause does not apply to funds,
s     deposits and securities in the care of the bran-
--- page 133 ---
-   Treaty Series.                          133

ches of the State Bank or private banks, credit
establishments and savings banks in the ter-
ritory of Lithuania.

   (2)  As regards the railway rolling stock and
telegraph and telephone installations, as well
as all the equipment of the railway shops
evacuated into Russia during the world war
of 1914-1917, Russia agrees to make good to
Lithuania part of these at a rate corresponding
to the local requirements of the Lithuanian
State, and making allowance for the general
 owering of the tone of the economic life.
   In order to exactly determine the amount
of the said replacement, a mixed commission
consisting of an equal number of members of
the two contracting parties shall be appointed
 mmediately upon the ratification of the pre-
sent treaty.
       REMARK.
   The replacement of railway rolling stock
and telegraph and telephone installations and
railway shop plant due to the occupied terri-
tory of Lithuania can only commence after
the same has been relieved from occupation.

   (3) For the purpose of carrying out the
conditions set forth in Articles 8, 9, io and ii
of the present Treaty, the Russian Government
undertakes to supply the Government of Lithua-
nia with all the particulars and data referring
 hereto and to give every possible assistance
 n tracing returnable property, archives, docu-
ments, etc. The more detailed arrangement of
 he questions arising in connection with this
subject shall be entrusted to a special mixed
commission consisting of an equal number of
members of the two contracting parties.

                  Article 12.
   The Russian Government taking into consi-
deration that during the world war Lithuania
has been almost entirely ruined, and that
Lithuanian citizens are deprived of the pos-
 ibility even of re-establishing their home-
 teads, their partly destroyed and gutted buil-
dings, owing to the destruction of the forests
 f Lithuania, expresses its willingness:
   (i) To release Lithuania from responsi-
bilities in regard to the debts and any other
--- page 134 ---
     -    Recuedi des Traites.                      1921
 -       liabilities of Russia, including such as have
r        resulted from the issue of paper money, trea-
-        sury notes, bonds, series and certificates of
s        the Russian Treasury in connection with the
s        foreign and internal loans of the Russian
 .       State, guarantees to sundry institutions and
a        undertakings, and the guaranteed loans of
e        same, etc.     All such claims of creditors of
         Russia for the share relating to Lithuania
         shall only be directed against Russia.
,           (2) In the localities nearest to the frontiers
-        of Lithuania and as near as possible to rivers
         down which timber can be floated, and to
-        railways, to grant to the Lithuanian Govern-
         ment the right to cut timber over an area
s        of Ioo,ooo dessiatins with a gradual alloca-
r        tion during the period of twenty years of
s        timber-cutting areas in accordance with the
s        plans of the Russian Forestal Department.
e        The fixing of the detailed conditions of the
         cutting of timber is left to a mixed commis-
-        sion consisting of an equal number of members
         of both contracting parties.
n           (3) To give to the Lithuanian Government
s        3,000,000 roubles in gold within the period of
 -       one month and a half from the date of the
         ratification of this treaty.

                           Article 13.
e           (i) The contracting parties agree to com-
u        mence within the earliest possible time after
 -       the ratification of the present treaty, nego-
 .       tiations for the conclusion of trading and
         transit conventions.
e           (2)  The principle of the most-favoured
-        nation shall be the basis of the trading con-
         vention.
s           (3) The following principles shall form the
         basis of the transit convention:
r           (a)   Goods passing in transit through the
t        territory of one of the contracting parties shall
         not be subject to any import dues or taxes.
-           (b)   The freight rates for goods in transit
h        shall not be higher than the freight rates for
s        similar goods of local destination.

                REMARK.
-           Prior to the commencement of normal
t        conditions, mutual transit traffic between Russia
s        and Lithuania shall be regulated by the same
s        principles.  Other conditions in reference to
-        the transit trade shall be fixed by special
         temporary agreements.
--- page 135 ---
-   Treaty Series.                           135

   (4) The Russian and Lithuanian commercial
fleets shall mutually make use of the harbours
of the contracting parties on equal rights.
   (5) Property left after the death of a citizen
of one of the contracting parties on territory
of the other shall be handed in toto into the
charge of the consular or respective represen-
tative of the country to which the testator
belonged, to be dealt with by the same in accord-
ance with the laws of such country.

                   Article 14.

   The diplomatic and consular relations bet-
ween the contracting parties shall be estab-
lished immediately after the ratification of
the present treaty. Upon the ratification of
the present treaty the parties shall proceed
with the making of a Consular Convention.


                   Article 15.

   Upon the ratification of this treaty the
Russian Government shall release Lithuanian
citizens and those opting Lithuanian citi-
zenship, and the Lithuanian Government shall
release Russian citizens and those opting Rus-
sian citizenship of military and civil classes
from penalties in connection with all political
and disciplinary actions. However, if judg-
ments have as yet not been given in such cases,
 he proceedings in connection with the same
shall be stopped.
   Persons who commit the aforesaid acts
after the ratification of this treaty shall not
enjoy this amnesty.
   Persons condemned by a criminal court for
acts not coming under the amnesty shall be
returned to their country of origin after serving
 entence. However, in the event of judgment
 n cases of such description not being given
prior to the expiration of one year from the
date of the accused being charged, he shall
on the expiration of this period be handed
over to the home authorities with all the pro-
ceedings relating thereto.
   In connection therewith both contracting
parties also release their own citizens from
punishment for acts committed by them
prior to the ratification of the present treaty
 or the benefit of the other party.
--- page 136 ---
     - Recueil des Traites.                        1921

                          Article 16.
x         In dealing with the present treaty the two
t      contracting parties shall take into considera-
a      tion the fact of their never having been in a
s      state of war one with the other and that Lithua-
a      nia as a region of military operations during
       the world war of 1914-1917 has particularly
       suffered from the latter. Therefore, all the
e      conditions of the present treaty can in no
       way serve as a precedent for any third country.
e      On the other hand, should one of the contracting
s      parties allow a third country or the citizens
-      thereof special privileges, rights and prefe-
e      rences, the same shall without special agreement
-      also extend to the other party or to the citizens
       thereof.
             REMARK.
 -       The contracting parties, however, shall not
s      prefer any claims to preferential rights which
l      one of them may grant to a third country
s      united to it by custom house or any other
       union.

                         Article 17.
         The settlement of questions of a public-
-     legal and private-legal description arising bet-
      ween the citizens of the contracting parties,
      and also the adjustment of any separate points
s     between the two countries, or between the
-     countries and citizens of the other party, shall
e     be effected by a special mixed commission of
i     an equal number of members of the two par-
      ties, appointed immediately upon the ratifi-
      cation of the present treaty, the composition,
      powers and duties of which shall be fixed by
      an instruction, to be agreed upon between the
      two contracting parties.

                         Article 18.
        The present treaty is drawn up in the Russian
      and Lithuanian languages. In its reading both
      texts are to be considered authentic.


                         Article 19.
          The present treaty is subject to ratification.
          The exchange of the letters of ratification
       is to take place at Moscow.
          Wherever the time of the ratification of
       the treaty is mentioned in the present treaty,
--- page 137 ---
-    Treaty Series.                           137

this applies to the time of the mutual exchange
of the letters of ratification.
   In witness whereof the representatives of
both parties have set their hands to the present
treaty and have affixed their seals thereto.
  The original was drawn up in duplicate and
executed in the city of Moscow on the twelfth
day of July, one thousand nine hundred and
twenty.



                 1
                     TRANSLATION.


                     PROTOCOL.
   The signatories of the present Protocol met
on October 14 th, 192o, at Moscow, in the
offices of the Commissary of the People for
Foreign Affairs, in order to exchange the ins-
truments of ratification of the Peace Treaty,
between Russia on the one hand and Lithuania
on the other, which was signed at Moscow on
July 12th, 1920, in accordance with Article 19
of that Treaty.
   After presentation of the instruments of rati-
fication, which were found to be in good and
due form, the two Parties satisfied themselves
that the contents were identical and the ex-
change of ratifications took place. In testimony
whereof the undersigned have drawn up this
Protocol and have thereto affixed their hand
and seal.
    This Protocol is drawn up in duplicate.

              (Signed) J. BALTRUSAITIS.
              (Signed) L. KARACHAN.




  I Translated by the Secretariat of the League
of Nations.
